---
layout: post
title: Why ODT should be the default
---

*DOCX vs ODT: Why ODT Should Be the Standard*


DOCX and ODT are two popular word processing file formats. DOCX is a proprietary format developed by Microsoft, while ODT is an open-source format developed by OASIS. (osais not from ready player one :) )

There are quite some differences with both of them:

| Feature       | Docx                       | ODT                               |
|---------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| File format   | Proprietary                | open source                       |
| Compatibility | Widely supported           | Widely supported                  |
| File size     | larger                           |  smaller
|
| Features      | supports all word features | May not support all Word features |
| Security      | Can be encrypted           | can be encrypted                  |
| Cost          | free to use                | free to use                       |


ODT has several advantages over DOCX, including:

- Open-source: ODT is an open-source format, which means that it is freely available to use and modify. This makes it a good choice for organizations and individuals who want to avoid vendor lock-in.
- Compatibility: ODT is widely supported by word processing software, including Microsoft Word, Google Docs, and LibreOffice Writer. This makes it easy to share and collaborate on documents with others, regardless of what software they are using.
- File size: ODT files are typically smaller than DOCX files, which can save storage space and bandwidth.
- Cost: ODT is free to use, while DOCX requires a license to use Microsoft Word.

Why ODT Should Be the Standard

ODT has the potential to be a better standard for word processing file formats than DOCX. It is an open-source format that is widely supported and free to use. ODT files are also typically smaller than DOCX files, which can save storage space and bandwidth.

Here are some of the benefits that everyone would get if ODT became the standard:

- Reduced costs: ODT is free to use, so organizations and individuals would save money on software licenses.
- Increased compatibility: ODT is widely supported by word processing software, so it would be easier to share and collaborate on documents with others.
- Reduced vendor lock-in: ODT is an open-source format, so organizations and individuals would not be locked in to using a particular software vendor.
- Improved security: ODT files can be encrypted to protect sensitive data.

<br>

**Tables in ODT**

ODT supports tables, which can be used to organize data and make it easier to read and understand. To create a table in ODT, open the Insert menu and select Table. You can then specify the number of rows and columns in the table.

Once you have created a table, you can add text, numbers, and images to the cells. You can also format the table by changing the font, color, and alignment of the text, as well as the borders and background of the table.

ODT is a better choice for word processing file formats than DOCX because it is an open-source, yeah open-source i want you to let that sink in. 
and yeah just beacuse more people should migrate to libre office and away from Microsoft simple. 

# Resources 
- [Differences between the OpenDocument Text (.odt) format and the Word (.docx) format used by Word for the web - Microsoft Support](https://support.microsoft.com/en-au/office/differences-between-the-opendocument-text-odt-format-and-the-word-docx-format-used-by-word-for-the-web-1183ee75-0aae-47c2-b2ba-0c839135011f)
- [About OpenDocument Format](https://opendocumentformat.org/aboutODF/)
- [OpenDocument Format Files Explained | Adobe](https://www.adobe.com/uk/acrobat/resources/document-files/open-doc.html)
- [How ODT files are structured | Opensource.com](https://opensource.com/article/22/8/odt-files)


<br>

*I am an open source enthusiast as you all know even though i might be forced to use docx to live in the world and put food on the table i will still use odt for sharing files with friends and keeping them to myself, and as always hope you enjoyed this one and let me know if i missed some stuff*
