---
layout: post
title: Mommy, Look at my dotfiles
---

*Dotfiles: Crafting my digital sanctuary on GitHub, where code meets personality and customization reigns supreme.*

Dot files are one of the most common repositories on GitHub they are signs that the owner of the repository is a chad and knows what they are doing 😂, jokes aside Dotfiles are essential for every developer or any tech enthusiast. There are multiple reasons for keeping your dotfiles on GitHub for example Backup, restore, and sync, discovering new tools for your toolbox and new tricks for the ones you already use, sharing what you’ve learned with the rest of us.

So how do you get started with your dotfiles?, Is there a formal way to manage your dotfiles?, can people contribute? 

Well, let's try to answer some of the questions one by one. 

## how to get started 

There are no how's and where on how to get started with dotfiles, all you need to do is create a directory name is whatever you want, but usually called dotfiles for a reason. Next you move all the configuration files and hidden folders you want to that folder, initialize and push it to a GitHub repository you created.

## Formal Way to manage your dotfiles ?

Well there is no formal way that is set to manage your dotfiles everyone uses whatever suits them. But there are indeed some tools created by other users to simplify the process of managing your dotfiles. But I do say it's better if you find something that suits you, experiment a bit.

I myself love to use a bunch of shell script for some of the task I do because they're mainly repetitive tasks/commands that can be automated. Usually this tasks go like 
```shell
git add . 
git commit -m "dot update"
git push
```
or even maybe 

```shell 
git clone {repo}
cd {repo}
rsync -ah --progress {obj} ~/.config/ 
```
Now that is a really simple implementation of a dofile usage. You can go even more complex and have an auto-install script that does everything once you just log in, which is really easy to do.

You can use python or bash for the scripting but if you're on a UNIX based system I highly recommend using bash as it's better, faster and simpler, here is an example of a simple script implementation in both bash and python 
```shell 
#!/bin/bash 

REPO_URL="git@github.com:yourusername/dotfiles.git"
DOTFILES_DIR="$HOME/dotfiles"
mkdir -p "$DOTFILES_DIR"

rsync -avz "$HOME/.config/" "$DOTFILES_DIR/"

cd "$DOTFILES_DIR" || exit
git init
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit - dotfiles"
git remote add origin "$REPO_URL"
git push -u origin master
```
same script in python 
```python 
import os
import shutil
import subprocess

REPO_URL = "git@github.com:yourusername/dotfiles.git"
DOTFILES_DIR = os.path.expanduser("~/dotfiles")
os.makedirs(DOTFILES_DIR, exist_ok=True)

shutil.copytree(os.path.expanduser("~/.config"), os.path.join(DOTFILES_DIR, ".config"))

os.chdir(DOTFILES_DIR)

subprocess.run(["git", "init"])
subprocess.run(["git", "add", "."])
subprocess.run(["git", "commit", "-m", "Initial commit - dotfiles"])
subprocess.run(["git", "remote", "add", "origin", REPO_URL])
subprocess.run(["git", "push", "-u", "origin", "master"])
```
well, you decide which one is easier and faster now 

## Can people contribute ?

I highly think this is a personal opinion, but for me, I do not like taking contributions from other people on my dotfiles because the is something really personal and how I choose to run and use my stuff. Giving people the freedom to browser and see through your code is indeed cool, cause someone else might learn something and implement it for their own. But accepting PR's on dotfiles is not my cup of tea. 

There is a lot more to dofiles  but I think this is enough if you want to dive deeper and know more about dotfiles check this site out 
[dotfiles.github.io](https://dotfiles.github.io/faq/)

#### Resources 
- [How to: dotfiles](https://www.twilio.com/en-us/blog/using-dotfiles-productivity-bootstrap-systems)
- [The Basics of Dotfiles](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BE87kUCTBVU)


#### Inspired by 
- [What Your GitHub Account Says About You](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3obM5OaOpHQ)

*As always, thanks for reading, hope you enjoyed your read. Peace out :)*
